[Music]
is the hijab 10
discount code for 10 percent discount on
a wide range of products including
premium ethiopian black seed products
assalamu alaikum another episode of the
mh podcast
i am joined with a spiritual guide
a very important youtuber conor murphy
how you doing connor
i'm great man how are you not bad conor
if you got in contact with me through
instagram
and he was telling me that you know he's
been watching some of my material
and um that he wants to explore some of
the ideas about islam and the concept of
god and
so on and so forth so we want to get
straight into it um
you said that in fact in that message
you said that you find that the uh
the idea of god is in islam is quite
coherent or
quite good and you're convinced by it
let's start with that what is your idea
of the islamic understanding of god okay
yeah and
it might not be correct yeah that's why
i'm here i'm here today
to understand your viewpoint for sure
but essentially
what i'm understanding is that uh islam
has a very
fundamental concept of god rather than
some complicated version of like a holy
trinity or something like that
yeah there is one all-powerful being
yes that's it created the entire
universe right yeah
and i think this is one of the reasons
why islam islam doesn't really use like
symbols like in
in christianity we have the symbol of
jesus right and the symbol of like this
man in the sky
but i like islam because it does not
portray god in any specific
way right because of course if we did
portray god in any specific way god
wouldn't be
infinite and amorphous and you know what
i mean so
that from that's what i understand yeah
and that's and that's pretty that's
pretty good that's that is exactly right
so
you know in terms of god we don't
believe in a
a person human being is god we don't
believe that anyone with a date of birth
can never be
an eternal god by definition and
obviously as muslims we do
believe in jesus christ we believe in
him as a prophet and a messiah
as a human being but not as a god he is
a human being a prophet
in the long line of prophets and
messengers abraham moses jesus all of
whom came
to tell people to worship in one god
or to believe in one god and worship and
do good deeds
so what is your general impression of
the
narrative that's being presented here of
all these prophets coming a full time
uh and dictating as it were the same
kind of message
yeah yeah so i think all these prophets
yeah found god they found god
yeah here's where i think it gets
interesting yeah okay
so i think these prophets knew god
beyond the conceptual mind so
essentially the analogy that i like to
use
is that these prophets actually
tasted the apple okay so they tasted
they experienced this
apple let's say and the issue is that
they experienced this apple but now the
apple is so great it's the best fruit in
the world and no one else in the in the
world knows what this apple is and of
course
they they can't make people experience
the apple it's not like they can bring
the apple with them and give it to
everyone else
so they start to try and explain
this apple right and they explain it the
best way that they can
they say oh it's red and juicy it's the
best fruit you'll ever have it's kind of
like an orange but it's different it
tastes a little sweeter blah blah blah
and now all these people they start
believing
that that's what this apple is
right but there is a big difference
there's a big distinction
a big distinguishment between thinking
and conceptualizing the apple
and actually knowing and experiencing
what that apple is
and that's i think where we run into
issues is that all these prophets knew
they experienced god
right they really knew god on the the
deepest
cellular existential level and then they
go and try and explain god
and of course people get the wrong idea
because they've never experienced god
they're trying to conceptualize
an infinite being with a finite human
mind
and it's impossible to really do i get i
get what you're saying you know i'm not
sure if you're aware but in islam there
is a concept of
the fitra now the fitra is is an innate
predisposition
and so it's exactly what you're kind of
describing here i believe i think there
is a
a great intersection at least in what
you're saying and what the filter is so
the fitra is this idea
that human beings not just prophets but
all human beings
have in them this innate predisposition
or receptivity to to knowing there's a
higher power
it's an innate receptivity and it's not
something which is
demonstrable it's not something which is
necessarily logical although it can be
as well right
it's not something which you can
describe through a human language
necessarily it's
it is just an inclination it is a
feeling it's a first person
subjective experience you could even
call it a spiritual experience but it's
one that
all human beings actually they they have
that experience whether they know it or
not
in fact in 2011 there was a study in
oxford university by justin barrett and
what was interesting is that
he collected you know this kind of data
from children
uh cross-culturally in different
countries and he found that one thing
is the case that wherever they have been
socialized
that children have this receptivity to
believe in god this is exactly the apple
i think you're just trying to describe
here maybe not
at the level of profits because
obviously we do believe that potentially
the the
the kind of interaction prophets would
have would be much more meaningful
and deeper and stronger but but on
an individual level i think there is
this propensity for human being to
to have this spiritual first person
subjective experience
what do you think absolutely yeah do i
love that you brought that up because i
was actually going to bring that up i
was watching one of your videos
and you were talking about this innate
belief in god that children would have
like oh that's so awesome because that
really puts atheism in a different
perspective
right the atheists believe that the
burden of proof
is on us yeah right when that is
completely subjective
to me it's like walking through a
chocolate factory right i'm seeing the
chocolate being made
the liquid flowing chocolate everywhere
and then you have an atheist who only
knows what a chocolate bar is
so we're walking through this chocolate
factory together and i'm like look at
all the chocolate and he's like what do
you mean
i don't see any chocolate i'm like dude
it's everywhere he's like uh no like
prove it i'm like it's right here it's
everywhere right
and he's like no no i don't see any
chocolate do some study show me the
chocolate i'm like no no you don't
underst
understand it it's everywhere i think
that they
need to prove that god doesn't exist
because i am
experiencing god everywhere you know
what i mean and so i think that i think
that's great i think that's something
that needs to be brought to light
more is this innate ability in children
to believe in god it's actually a very
natural thing
right for sure and i think that i think
with these kinds of discussions it's
important
to have a robust definition of god
because for us
you know the arabic word literally means
an object of worship
something which is worshipped and and
then we go to another question what is
worship
because depending on how we define that
then we'll be able to establish whether
or not
people or worship objects in the first
place so
our understanding of worship is entire
submission
or like being fully in submission to a
thing
whether that be it could be your body it
could be money
like it could be your own desires so the
quran says for example
have you seen the one who takes his own
desires as his lord in other words
he sees that the apex the moral apex of
submission is to one's own
pleasure and pain for example right that
they want to maximize
pay uh pleasure and minimize pain and
that is basically
the purpose of life and however much you
do that
is how much you'll be coming closer to
establishing your purpose
so from from those perspectives the
thing
which you worship is a god right and
and the the islamic claim at least
especially it relates to atheists is
that they're not actually atheists in
the first place that they do have
a set of beliefs or they they do have
something which they would
submit to or it could be a variety of
different things whether it be the law
whether it be social expectations
whether it be spousal expectation
whether it be friendship groups that
they whether it be their own desires
or a combination of all of those things
we would say that they are in fact
um fully submissive to all of those
things and therefore they are
polytheists
they're not they're just a sophisticated
form of politicians they're not actually
atheists at all
but it doesn't really hinges on the
definitions of god
and hinges on the definition of worship
but but yeah
for us that would be the case and so the
islamic understanding is that there's
only one god worthy of worship
so you have all of these different gods
but they are not worthy of worship
because they didn't create you they're
not sustaining you they're not
maintaining you
they are not the greater power that you
had an intuitive inclination towards
and therefore they are not worthy of
worship what is in fact worthy of
worship
is the one who created you and is
maintaining you and all those things
that we've just mentioned
i like it it's like we need to come up
with a word it's like a
part theist it's like they're worshiping
like a part
of god but not god itself right which is
kind of silly you know what i mean it's
like why are you going to worship why
are you going to worship science because
atheists do they worship science that's
like a god to them
they think it's they put that on a
pedestal right it's it's essentially
worship
but yet why worship that when that is
just a part
of something much bigger yeah absolutely
and this is the kind of understanding so
like you said especially new atheists i
wouldn't generalize all ideas but
definitely new atheists
you'll find that they they actually even
claim sometimes that science is
omniscient
and that it can kind of answer all
things but this is
flawed on so many levels because science
just doesn't have
the propensity or capacity or
facilitation to be able to deal with why
questions to deal with metaphysics
difficult to do with mathematics
and morality and all morality and and so
therefore science is
entirely limited and in fact science is
an enterprise
right it's so so it's it's based on this
principle of falsification
the whole idea of science is that we're
trying to not only prove things but
disprove things as well
so science in order for it to be so has
to be it has to have the ability to
being
falsified and so if you're in a sense
putting all your hopes into the
scientific enterprise you haven't
understood it which is the irony of
all all ironys really i think yeah
absolutely any system
that is self-reflective right that can
self that can self-reference
it has the ability to destroy itself so
if you can do
science on science it destroys it right
just like if you do logic
on logic it can destroy logic right
goodell proved this with cadell's
incompleteness theorem right essentially
the statement
this statement is unprovable right
essentially you have a statement
and by definition it is unprovable and
so therefore it's true but you can't
prove it with logic and what that shows
is that truth is beyond logic
right and so there are these truths that
are beyond
any of these systems right the deepest
truth is this
uh you can call it this intuition this
intuitive truth that is really beyond
like even the conceptual mind and that's
what people don't realize is that we're
so trapped in this
symbolic mind these these these symbols
these concepts right
we're mistaking the the map for the
territory right and so
yeah i think that's something that
people really need to understand is that
all these systems
they're great for understanding the
content of reality
right but not the context that's
something that science can't
explain is the context right because
think about this if you're in a dream
right you can do science in a dream even
if the dream is different
from reality right it still has science
you know what i mean you can do science
in a dream in some dreams it could have
the same laws as reality right
but what science will never tell you is
that you're in the dream
right science can't tell you that you
can't do science in a dream to figure
out that you're in the dream
you realize that you're in the dream by
just
intuitively you become lucid in the
dream something just sets off this
trigger and you just realize
through the mind through kind of a
deeper mind that you're in the dream
right and that's something that science
can't do yeah and that's because
science works on a third person level
and dreams and all these subjective
experiences are all first person
and so the inability of science to
interact with
the first person is just as well is
inbuilt within the system if it was
first person it would be subjective and
therefore would lose its veracity as a
as a scientific method as it were but
in terms of now this was something that
you kind of hinted at in the beginning
of the discussion
which is the the idea of not not knowing
god or not being able to know god fully
and yeah if you look at for example the
quran there's lots of attributes of god
names and attributes of god right
but having said that there are some
principles which override our own
our understanding or interaction with
those attributes and it's actually a
verse in the quran which is
chapter 42 verse 11 which says that
there's nothing like him at all
and that he is all seeing or hearing so
in other words when when we're for
example
as an example introduced to the name of
god or one of the attributes of god
that he's the most merciful or that he's
the king for example
now one of the names of god in the
islamic corpus is that he's the king
but obviously now if we take this word
king malik in the arabic language
in the hebrew language if we take this
word
this word king really when we when we
apply it on a human level
in the world that we live in now
obviously it denotes masculinity for
example
a king is not a queen so that so you
were thinking about a man
and obviously we know that god is not a
man or a woman so that aspect of
describing god is definitely not
concurrent with it
so this i think was kind of touching
upon what you were saying in the
beginning that human language
human language whatever language it may
be is always going to be limited
to being able to describe god because of
the
magnificence of god or the grandiosity
of of god
and therefore human language is always
going to be limited
that's why it's important to even when
we're as muslims when we're kind of
reciting the quran and going over the
names and attributes of god
to realize that these names and
attributes
despite how beautiful they are they
don't do justice they don't do full
justice
to the magnanimity or the the the
grandiosity
of of god almighty which you say allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala or god almighty
so i i do agree with you on that for us
we do have descriptions of god but they
uh they they do not do justice to the
entirety of god or
the essence of god or anything like that
and this is even the case when we
because in islamic parlance we do have
like heaven and hell for example we
believe in heaven and hell we believe in
you know the day of judgment we believe
when human beings die that it's not just
going to be that they turn into
rubble and dust and bone that there will
be kind of like another reckoning that
they'll be
resurrected and that they'll be judged
on the day of judgment um
depending on what kind of deeds they did
what kind of belief they had you know if
they were introduced to the truth and
were they receptive to the truth
um or not and so on and so forth and
then that
we do believe in heaven we do believe in
hell and so
for example this afterlife space we we
although there's lots is vivid and you
know description in the quran and
the hadith about you know god in the
gardens and
the hellfire and installments and so on
the prophet said something quite
interesting about this he says
that we even though all of these
descriptions are there no one has
actually
experienced it with their heart all of
those things so these descriptions
are all there but they will will not be
sufficient and maybe
being able to make you experience those
realities and likewise
even though all the descriptions are
there about god and their correct
descriptions and true we would say
that some of them are not applicable
because they say
he say there's nothing like him so for
example god is not a man
and a king is a man in the world that we
live in and so on
so from those perspectives i kind of do
i don't disagree with the point that you
were making in the beginning of the
podcast that although
we do have all these subscriptions it
really is an experiential thing
right i love it and i love how you said
how you can't really put
a definition on god i mean you can you
can
try but it will always be an abstraction
yeah right so i like to think of god as
analogous to
a mirror right on a much more grandiose
scale but we can think of a mirror
right the essence of a mirror
is that it essentially has no properties
other than being reflexive
right so this is the issue if the mirror
had any properties whatsoever
such as being red right or being
you know uh only reflecting big things
only reflecting small things
then it would be limited in that sense
that
you couldn't put something in the mirror
and
you know create that image right if it
was red then everything in the mirror
would be red it wouldn't serve
its purpose right and it's perfect
purpose is to simply reflect
all else that there is right so i kind
of think like to think of god as
as this infinite mirror right mirrors
are still limited because they're in the
physical space
in space and time right yeah so god is
almost like this
this infinite near this
infinite singularity of reflexiveness if
that makes sense and still that's an
abstraction because
anything that uses language is an
abstraction
now god i mean of course you would say
that
god god's essence is essentially you
know absolute infinity
right god is boundless limitless right
and just by the nature of experience
itself
right experience must be finite
right you can't experience everything at
once or that would take away from the
essence of experience
so you can't experience
this absolute infinity that
god is but and of course even these
prophets
right there it's there's no way they
experience absolute infinity
right but i believe that they can
experience maybe some sort of lower
level infinity right there are different
levels of infinity right there's a
an infinite amount of numbers between
one and two but there's a greater amount
of numbers between one and a hundred
right if you count all the decimal
places right
and so i think that the human mind is
actually capable of
having some tremendous incredible
mystical experiences
of certain levels of infinity but not
ever
the the greatest the absolute right and
i think the the absolute can really only
be known
in the relative but i think there's
still something to be found there that
can be
kind of known on a deeper experiential
level
yeah i i a lot of what you said
resonates with me i think there's
there would be one thing where we
obviously as muslims the traditional
kind of normative
narrative would would disagree with is
the fact that
okay so we we differentiate between
parts and attributes right so for
example
what causes limitation that something is
composed of parts and can is subject to
the assembly can be broken up
and can be rearranged you know this
is an indication of finitude right
because it's something which is limited
in its variables
and anything that fits that profile
cannot be got by definition so it cannot
be the
the maximal it cannot be the infinite it
cannot be the limitless
it has to be limited by extension
therefore
but we would say that there is a subtle
and very important difference between
those parts and attributes so for
instance when we use the word infinity
it
sometimes loses this meaning unless we
attach to it
kind of like an adjective afterwards so
infinitely what so if we're talking
about infinitely powerful are we talking
about infinitely loving are we talking
about infinitely merciful
and so in in many ways what's required
in order to
give value if you want any type of value
or make sense of
uh any kind of sense to this thing that
we would like to call god for the sake
of argument
is that we attach adjectives now so for
example it says god is infinite that's
already kind of like an adjective but
when someone probes and says well what
is this god infinite in
we would come back and say well he's
infinite in power for example or he's
infinite in
uh mercy or infinite in level whatever
it is you want to
put as an adjective there some things we
would be able to kind of extrapolate
logically and other things would would
be textually for example like love
i would argue that it's not something
that's logically intuitive or
demonstrable
something either you experience for
first person subjective experience or
through some kind of a text
and obviously from for up from our
perspective obviously jews and
christians as well
they believe that god is love we all
believe that god is love
that's something that's concurrent
within all three so-called abrahamic
religions so
um it's important when you say that god
is infinite in order to make sense of
the sentence that we attach
kind of like an adjective there and that
essentially becomes the attribute of god
not a property in the sense that can be
pulled apart and you know dissembled and
so on
but it is something which makes sense of
this concept of god otherwise it becomes
almost a meaningless uh concept it
becomes something which is
uh you know a figment of one's
imagination or has just become
it does unfortunately become an
abstraction of some sorts so for us we
would
in order for to make sense of the
concept we'll say yeah god is infinite
but in what so for instance power is one
thing
uh knowledge is another thing you know
omniscience omnipotence all the omni
qualities and so on
i like it interesting what about
infinitely infinite
yeah that's just tautology right so that
would be yeah
that's just a tautology so in logic that
would just be like saying it rain is
raining and it's raining it's
right and this is true it's a true
statement it's always true sociology is
always true but it's just
kind of like superfluous in terms of
right well and that's the issue is
because we're trying to explain
this this being that's beyond logic with
logic and that's why
it's it's so difficult right yes exactly
yeah yeah yeah
but yeah interesting man i like it
so it's really difficult though because
you'll kind of this is the issue when
you try and explain it with logic
is that you'll kind of run into these
contradictions right and a lot of people
you know we live in this logical
rational world where there are these
contradictions and people think it's
wrong
but contradictions are only wrong in the
realm of
of logic right and systems because god
of course
must transcend that god and reality in
general
seems to me like this giant paradox and
this this contradiction that actually
exists right so for example
here's an interesting paradox right so
if you would probably say that god is
we'll use the the
the attribute you call it right
infinitely let's call god infinitely
knowledgeable right so he has infinite
knowledge right yeah so
all knowing or and not him it it's
whatever
god is right infinite knowledge right
but if god has infinite knowledge
then god has limited power because if
god has infinite knowledge that means
that god could not
learn right that's interesting
right and so what is it
why would that limit his power to learn
right because if you know it
right okay
it's an interesting question it's
actually been put forward in the
theology type questions like can god lie
can it's not just learn
can god learn can god lie can god steal
can
god like there's a lot of things that
can god do
you know the quran never says god can do
everything i mean this is not what
the the paradigm is uh the quran
actually says
and this is the islamic understanding
that allah is over
all things powerful and i'll tell you
what the subtle difference is
in logic you in terms of categories
there's three major categories all right
there's the impossible existences and
the contingent or possible existences
and the necessary existences
so an impossible existence is something
which is a contradiction in terms like a
squared circle
so we just mentioned like you know
contradictions do exist in the real
world that we're in or at least through
the systems that we're thinking through
like logic and mathematics and whatever
so a squared circle
is not actually a thing right right so
because a squared circle cannot
instantiate itself in the real world
right so we would say things that are
impossibilities
are not things at all although they can
be elaborated upon
er through language they're not things
at all so for example the idea of a
learning god
is an impossibility because it's the
same thing as saying for example that
you have an all-knowing
ignorant person so if we only need to
learn
a learning is only possible for the
ignorant and so if if you're all knowing
ignorant then it's a contradiction it's
just like saying can god create a rock
so heavy that he can't lift
but that's a contradiction in terms
because if we're saying god can lift all
the rocks
then him creating such a rock that he
can't lift would mean that he's limited
and unlimited at the same time
so it's essentially asking can god be
unlimited
oh sorry can god be limited and
unlimited at the same time
and we would say no the answer is the
answer is a flat no because
that would the question itself would
presuppose a contradiction in terms
likewise if someone said can god steal
well if we say look
god steal well that's how can god steal
when he owns everything
so that would be a contradiction in
terms so you see right
the idea of a learning god doesn't
diminish from the power of god but in
fact
it actually affirms his power if you
think about it
right i get what you're saying but
here's the thing is that
we're saying these contradictions can't
be true but of course we're thinking
in systems and logic right yeah i
believe that
god is so powerful that there's a way
for both of these to be true at the same
time this is kind of the idea of
non-duality right so god can both be
unlimited
and limited and in fact god is so
powerful
that it finds a way to do this right
so god is so powerful that it can put
itself in ignorance right and this is
kind of the idea if you think of the
difference between a subconscious mind
and a conscious mind god could be
consciously ignorant but subconsciously
all-knowing right so god gets to kind of
experience this ignorance
but deep down never loses its its
knowledge
i get what you're saying and this is
kind of i mean it's quite similar to
what
some tree i know you don't associate
with it but a lot of trinitarians kind
of use this
line of reasoning when they're trying
for example in in the bible where it
says that
jesus he kind of looked at this tree and
it was out there and
the figs went on so he cursed the tree
and so he and it says in the in the
bible also that you know he doesn't know
no one knows
who when the hour is going to be except
for the father and so to kind of
to put themselves out of this misery
they usually have
there are three major i mean there's
economic models there's social models
and they're psychological models of the
so-called trinity right
so what you're actually describing is is
is in the literature
it's referred to as psychological models
of the trinity so it's kind of like
you've got one individual
and that he's got he's got these
relationships within himself like a
multiple personalities i mean
some scholars have actually said like a
multiple personality disorder right you
said a subconscious mind
in psychoanalytics it's actually
referred to as the unconscious mind
subconscious thing is a colloquial term
that some laymen have just invented
actually freud would use the term
unconscious
um and so it's kind of similar to what
the you know the psychological models of
the
of the trinity the truth of the matter
is once again it
it is actually putting forward
contradictions now in terms of
the whole idea of can god allow
contradictions to exist which is a very
interesting
question and i actually thought about
this question quite a lot
and we would say that god everything
that emanates in the real world
is emanated from god so
what god is from the islamic perspective
is god is
the truth and he's also one we believe
that he's
he's one in essence right he's not zero
because that would mean that there's
nothing there and he's not more than one
because then that would suggest that
this
kind of polytheism so if god is one
in a sense all systems of mathematics
derive from that unity of god
and if god is the truth all systems of
logic derive from that system
of reality and truth and so god emanates
those things and so logic is a is just a
derivative
of the expression of god's truth
so logic logic from this perspective of
mathematics so anything that we see is
hard truth in the universe
is explainable through the prism or the
paradigm of god
not despite it so it doesn't exist in in
a a mutually exclusive world it exists
as a result of
uh not will for instance right so having
said that going back to the point of
um limit and experiencing ignorance
like i said there are things that if god
does
he stops being god by definition and
that's why it's important to have a
robust definition of god
now we talked about an object of worship
but there's another thing that should be
understood here that god is
if we're saying that he's ultimately
all-powerful or knowledgeable all these
things
then his cessation to being any of those
things at any time
logically entails his cessation of being
god for instance
you know can god be a man the question
of can god be a man
christians would answer yes and
obviously that's instantiated through
jesus christ
we would say that would necessitate a
contradiction in terms which is that
you have this unlimited entity that has
to become limited
and therefore has to suspend his
necessary
attribute of being unlimited and if you
suspend it at any point or if it's
suspendable then it was never necessary
by definition it must have been
contingent because if it was necessary
the definition of something which is
necessary is something which can never
be
any other way at any time it's eternally
necessary
and so this idea of the ignorance of god
or
uh that god can steal because you could
you could actually go to
lengths with this one you could say can
god rape
can god steal can god now you can start
bringing in lying
you know can god do and the answer would
be how could a all
truth true create to uh entity
lie how that would that would uh go
against his uh
ability of being all uh the truth
do you see the idea there yeah i think
there's a difference between
relative truth and absolute truth um but
how you said how
like let's say logic the system of logic
is a derivative of god
right so in some way reflects god right
but here's the thing about life yeah we
would say it reflects his will more so
right yeah yeah it reflects god's will
here's the interesting thing
we've known that through gudel's
incompleteness theorem that logic
essentially shows limitations of itself
yeah yeah
so it's essentially god showing
that there is truth beyond logic right
so i i just be careful not to put logic
on
on this pedestal right yeah i'll move
you on that yeah yeah it's tough because
that's how
modern society debates and talks about
things you know and and that's the
yeah right that that's yeah yeah i mean
we've got those incompleteness theorem i
mean bear in mind he had two
he had two uh models that he submitted
one of them i think in the 30s and then
he had another one
and what he was doing is i think you
kind of described it in a good way like
the
the paradox of uh the liar's paradox
basically the last paradox but
really what he was doing was he's
applying that to mathematics through set
theory
and saying that if well you've got all
these things in a set then this uh
is the set part of the set and not part
of this at the same time so it's kind of
like a paradox right
right but that doesn't mean i mean i
don't think from that people have
decided that mathematics is not as
untrue
it just means i mean what it means is
that mathematics just like logic
um underpinning it are these axioms
which are basically there
there are no there is no a way of
proving those axioms by definition a
theorem an axiom
or an axiom in particular is something
which cannot be proven
so a b equals b a
you know in mathematics it's not
something you can prove or i can prove
it's just an axiom it has to be the way
is because it is
and on an atheistic paradigm quite
interestingly this there's no
explanation for this actually this
you can't even explain why we have
rational faculties or why
logic exists in the first place or how
we can have an interactivity with
logical mathematics
but from the theist paradigm there is
there is an explanation is that that
these axioms have been put in place by
an all-knowing you know
instantiator of like if you like or
the terminator or whatever you want to
call so or a lawmaker
and so from that from that angle yeah i
think what goldu was instrumental in
showing
in his time and he was definitely one of
the biggest names in the 20th century in
terms of philosophy
was that there are these axioms which
you cannot prove you know the buck stops
that certain axioms and you
it becomes uh impossible to prove
further than that but i don't think what
he showed
is that mathematics is as i think is a
common misconception that mathematics is
totally uh contradictory to itself
right right i mean right i wouldn't
necessarily say it's contradictory to
itself
i guess i'll just say that it's limited
for example yes for mathematics to even
exist
you have to have this concept of an
object
right to add one and one well what are
those two things that you're adding
yes well those are these objects and i
believe that there is a reality
beyond even objects right
and of course god predates all objects
god gave rise to these objects
right so trying to describe god in like
a mathematical sense
it's almost like trying to describe math
with physics
right you actually need math for physics
to even exist
in math with physics right you can't
explain like a higher level system
with a lower level system and that's why
it's really impossible because god is
the highest system
to explain god with any any language
any system any words anything yeah
everything will be limited
right so this is why i think there's um
i don't think we're talking across
purposes i think we both understand what
we're talking
like what the other person is saying but
this is what i would say right
it's possible to describe god but
whatever description you have is going
to be limited
so it is possible we we can con we can
conceptualize god
but we can't we can't fully encompass
what god is in essence we can't say that
what god is
and then any language will do justice to
the you know the attributes of god
so i totally agree with that but having
said this what is required of human
being is not to fully
from the islamic paradigm it's not to
fully um kind of uh encapsulate
or encompass what is uh to be god
uh or what god is like it's more so to
conceptualize him on an
abstract level so that you could have
some kind of relationship with him in
your life
right that's basically the point of
islam so going back to the meta
narrative
islam is basically saying that you have
all these prophets and messengers
you know abraham moses jesus that you
you've heard of in you know sunday
school or whatever it may be that you've
done in
in the western experience you know uh
moses and so on and then we we say that
prophet muhammad came with the final
message for all humankind whereas all
those kind of other prophets were kind
of localized to their
people and times we believe that the
prophet muhammad was for all peoples in
all times
and that like every prophet we believe
that not only do they come with
they don't just come with the message
which is to believe in one god and
worship in one god this experience that
you've had this in a
in you know intuitive uh experience that
you've had
that you reconnect with it and know your
purpose which is to submit to this
uh higher power but not only this but
it's
he this messenger comes with um
this a set of proofs and evidences to
to make them credible in their
communities
and it's usually something which the
community is very aware of
and and can be actually tested so from
the islamic perspective we believe
that prophet muhammad not only he came
with the quran which is we obviously
believe is the greatest miracle but
there was a set of miracles within the
quran and outside of it also
that substantiated his prophet here or
gave him credence or gave him some kind
of credibility
and so if someone who comes now like
yourself or anybody else
who's investigating islam as a coherent
way of life
and potentially a way to to to to live
your life
that it wouldn't just be this narrative
that i'd be telling you now it'll be
actually we've got a set of proofs which
we believe we can put forward to you
which will go further by way of
convincing you that islam is true
right i mean yeah i think the goal what
islam is
attempting to do they're doing it very
well in fact probably better than any
other religion to be honest it's it's
it's
yeah it's it's not very flawed at all in
terms of you know logic and rationality
right
but i do believe that there is a way to
know god
not completely right this is the idea of
absolute infinity
is that it can never be fully known
right i think this is actually the
beauty of reality is that because think
about it think if you really knew god
like completely somehow 100 percent well
then what left is there
right that's kind of that kind of suck
right to me reality is it's
it's a a flawed perfection right again
another paradox
but the kind of the point is that
it's this journey of knowing right so
you can know god
more and more and more and more and more
but because god is absolutely infinite
it would it takes infinite time to fully
know god and i think that's the beauty
of it
right i would just say that
abstraction such as concepts right
are limited in the sense of knowing god
and a lot of people think that that is
just the straight up limit
i believe that there are ways to go
beyond that
right to experience what prophets have
experienced
right because it seems like these
prophets have gone beyond the conceptual
mind
right to me i believe that these
prophets
were simply human beings yeah right
they weren't this absolute infinity
necessarily like in human form as we
would
we would think about it from a dualistic
theist mind
but they were normal humans who just
discovered
on a deep level what god was
right and i don't think that they needed
any sort of
religion to actually do it because of
course god is
within and they found that within
themselves
does that make sense that's kind of yeah
i mean there's a lot that i i agree with
like in terms of
um prophets having this in they intuit
god and so on and so forth
and they experience god and that we
can't a lot of the things that we can't
uh
fully understand god you know i mean i i
completely agree with those things
the one thing that we would say is that
prophets
they the thing that distinguishes
profits from the rest of human beings
is the fact that god communicated with
them directly
right he he spoke to them through some
kind of intermediary
so in the case of the majority of
prophets it would be
the angel gabriel in the islamic
narrative so the angel gabriel would
come as an angel
who takes different forms he came and
communicated literally communicated
through human language with prophets and
it was an experience that they went
through so for example the prophet
muhammad
the story goes he went to a cave
which was a cave that's still there now
you can see in mecca
and um in saudi arabia and he was he was
meditating like you know he was
he had a meditative temperament he used
to go and basically pack some food go up
to the cave and just basically reflect
on god i mean
uh this the story went and uh all of a
sudden he was seized by this angel
uh he had these kind of experiences with
this angel that
would then say to him
literally at first actually he said
which is read
and the prophet muhammad was illiterate
so he was unlettered he couldn't read
because that was the
social milieu of the time was a kind of
unletted milieu
for the most part in the arab desert at
that time in the 7th century
so he said i don't i can't actually
read so he said again read and then he
said
he said for the third time read and then
the prophet said i can't read
and so then the what we believe is the
first verses of the quran
were revealed to the prophet which is
read in the name of your lord who
created
created human being from a clot
read
the one who created human being and the
one who taught him by the pen
so two things that came down and we
believe the first revelation which was
that
god created human beings from a clot
and then after that that he he taught
him with the pen
so this was the first interaction the
prophet then the story goes he went to
his wife
uh which was khadijah she was actually
his boss as well uh funny enough she was
his uh
he used to work in in trade and business
so she went to he went to his wife and
he explained to her what happened this
frightening experience that he
kind of just went through and she said
don't worry you know god wouldn't
because they had the idea of god in the
time
you know because of the previous
dispensations you know judaism and
christianity and
the abrahamic religions um so she said
god wouldn't punish you because you're
you know you do good with the orphans
you're a charitable person and you're a
good person you're known in the
community for this and that
and she covered and he said zem
bellini's i mean he was shivering and
and so on and so she covered him she
covered him with with blankets
and this was the first this is the
beginning of revelation and we believe
that this took place for 23 years peace
meal
that bit by bit the angel kept
revisiting the prophet kept revisiting
the prophet giving him more and more
kind of verses to recite from the quran
and so on until we had
the total the totality of the quran
which
is now 6236 odd verses or 600 pages or
70 000
words or whatever it may be and that is
the guidance for humankind in terms of
how to live and and what to do in your
life and
uh and so on so basically the idea of
prophethood in islam
is uh the idea that an angel literally
or that god communicates
to you through an angel so that you can
give guidance
to human beings to your community and
with uh the prophet muhammad obviously
because we believe he was the final
prophet we believe that he was sent for
all human beings you know
um we haven't sent you except for
all of humankind you know and the
prophet said in his final speech you
know there's no
there is no um
there's no virtue of a black person over
a white person or a white person over a
black person or an arab of a non-arab
or a non-arab or an arab except through
virtue
through good deeds and and god
consciousness god consciousness
and so the whole idea really it's a
universal message
which is saying that this is a blueprint
for how to live your life
uh and i think this were a lot of
western people um especially because of
kind of like the cultural revolution the
60s and after that where it really just
it became quite widespread and
liberalism became widespread this is
where a lot of people start tuning off
because they start thinking themselves i
don't want to live my life based on
organized religion you know but this is
we believe it's actually quite
liberating to do so
because when you live your life through
the guidance of god you're submitting
yourself
to god in the most practical way
possible it's not it's not just
a spiritual exercise or a meditation
that you do or something like that it's
actually
a physical thing how you interact how
you even clean yourself i mean it has
such
detailed kind of guidance that we
believe it's it's
a practical way that god has given us
for how to deal with life on a daily
basis
i like it yeah there's a sense of
submission that is very very powerful
it's interesting everyone kind of wants
to be in control and the western world
is plagued by this want this want for
power right this want for control
but what people don't realize is that we
actually don't want control on the
deepest level
why because as humans were in perfect
beings
right and if we're all in control all
the time well that's where chaos leads
to
because we have these imperfect minds
right but of course
submission to this higher power and the
allowance of this higher power to
control us
this higher power that is perfection
yeah obviously our lives are going to be
much better right
and yeah i like that a lot for sure i
have an interesting question though so
when when we talk about angels right
what exactly is an angel right because i
also think that it's it's kind of
dangerous to try and define what this
angel is
because this angel is is probably
something that is also beyond logic and
rationality as well
right it could be beyond all these
systems of language that that we're
talking about
so i i think it's also people have to be
wary of having this
image of this angel in their mind right
this ain't
this image of this physical angel like
someone in a halloween costume
that's flying down and doing some magic
trick you know what i mean yeah um
i think that this angel is a real thing
right but i think it's it's dangerous to
try and understand that with a
conceptual mind just like it's it's
dangerous to
attempt to define god right you can say
that i mean it's
a metaphysical construct we believe that
angels were created from light
we believe that god created these angels
um and that there are these creatures
that
um that live with with us really the the
they're part of the metaphysic of
reality
and and it's really interesting because
just because something is metaphysical
doesn't mean that sometimes it can't be
physical so in the islamic tradition
uh there is an idea that the angel can
take human form as well
so so the angel would come in human form
sometimes to the prophet and to the
companions
and speak uh to them uh if not it would
come in a different form so the angel
can be
come from the same perspective in
different forms
and the purpose of the angel is that
they basically have different functions
they are part of the system of the
universe
they are invisible you cannot see them
but they are part of the system of the
universe so they have different
functionalities for example there's an
angel that is
uh discharged with particularly one
job which is to the installment of the
embryo
for example there's another angel which
ironically takes away your life
you know it all takes away your soul and
the soul is something once again which
is
some we cannot put our finger on it we
don't know where it is or what it is
and in fact the quran says this and it
says yes
you know they ask you about the soul say
the soul is from the affairs of the lord
and we don't know much about it like
what you're saying we don't know
and you will not know much about it
because once again it's it's
metaphysical right so
we have we cannot put under a microscope
and do experiments on it in that sense
right so from those angles i totally
agree i mean the metaphysical world is
the metaphysical world
right islam doesn't um
it doesn't judge people for not being
able to conceptualize these things islam
judges people for their ability to
believe in those things
like you're rewarded for believing in
the fact that there are angels and that
there's a god that you can't see and
there is a soul that you can't see and
that and so on
and in fact that's one of the first
things that i mentioned
this book has no doubt in it you know
it's a guidance for those who are pious
the ones who are they believe in the
unseen
way and they and they do their prayers
and they are charitable with the monies
that we we provide for them
so the the idea of
you know these things metaphysically a
lot of people are kind of put off by
them
because they feel like it's it's legend
or myth or fairy tale all these things
but the truth of the matter is there's
lots of things even in this in the world
of science that we live in which can't
we can't see gravity is a force but we
don't see it
at the end of the day gravity we only
know it through its effect
we have we have never seen gravity but
we all acknowledge it and we all believe
in it
you know and if it's true that we we can
believe in something
through just the effect of it and
there's almost consensus in the
scientific community but no one has seen
this gravity
no one has seen it no one has put it
under a microscope then
the idea of believing in a god who
created the universe
and having the same kind of reasoning
from cause to effect
is not something which is delusional as
many new atheists would like to
us to believe and and and we would say
also by extension
all of those other metaphysical things
once again if you've already shown the
propensity to be able to believe
something you cannot empirically see
which is for example gravity then
it's not really that much of a leap of
faith to believe in for example angels
and demons in heaven and hell and god
and all those things
right no absolutely right i guess to me
again impossible to really conceptualize
what an angel is unless you
experience it i guess yeah but i would
say that essentially
i mean everything is god right so
essentially this angel is a fragment
of god right for a specific purpose
right um
and essentially i guess that would would
be say muhammad would be
as well and it's so kind of all these
fragments kind of coming together
into one right i get what you're saying
so this is this is something that
obviously
um we don't believe in okay we don't
believe that god is
everywhere in that sense we're in
essence
we believe that we don't believe that
god is everyone in his essence such that
all of us are gods
uh or that we have an element of god we
believe that if this was the case this
would limit god
going back to the question of limitation
because if this was the case
then our limitations would translate
over to god's limitations but in fact
god is transcendental in terms of his
uh imposition or his interaction with
with creation okay so okay essence god
is uh
transcendental however in terms of
attributes
there is this idea in islam or
being with god so the being with god
is through his attributes and through
his uh through connection with him
through connection with him so even
speaking to god this is
actually a system in islam of speaking
to him
or supplication or even uh glorifying
him or supplicating him
so these are all systems of
interactivity where you can actually
speak to god in heaven we don't believe
this
aloof kind of god you know a deistic god
that just creates everything and then
just goes you know
goodbye i'm not gonna have an
interaction with anybody right of course
one of my friends he recently said
something interesting he said that it's
like this
father that leaves the house or
something like that you know we don't
believe a god that you know created
everything and says you know i'm just
gonna leave now because i'm not
interested
we believe in a personal god we do
believe in a god that has an interaction
of meaningful interaction with human
beings but not that he in his essence
in his in his essence just like you said
we can't even conceptualize god
fully so let alone to say that you know
you know my physical flesh is an
instantiation of god
or my physical eyes and head and all
that stuff that way god is not
something which you can physically touch
like this we believe that he's
transcendental that he's above and
beyond in his essence
the um the kind of
uh scientific method if you like i see
i guess my argument would be that yeah
if god
could not be physical if god could not
not have a human existence
that would make god limited yeah as i've
said before like you know with these
things like
it depends on how we define what
limitation is right so
if we say that limitation is god is
being
uh god is all-powerful so his so
limitation in this context would be if
he cannot instantiate that power
if there's if there's a deficiency in
his power or if he loses power
or becomes weak or any of those things
god is always there
uh in other words he's pre-eternal is
post-eternal so a limitation would be
for instance that he
he's born because this would uh mean
that he
is no longer eternal he's somehow has a
date of birth any person that you can
point to and say this person has a date
of birth
we will say this cannot be god because
this person has a date of birth whereas
god
does not have a date of birth and so on
and so forth and
with this idea as well so remember we're
dealing with
necessary attributes attributes that had
they been any other way or would they be
any other way
this would crumble the idea of god in in
front of our faces
the idea of god would no longer be
tenable because then it would just be
something that is
changing a mutable
uh corridable creature right
yeah right now of course god
is so powerful and so indescribable
what if it was possible for god to be
both physical and unphysical to be born
but also eternal right to be mortal
but also immortal what if god was that
powerful
where he could go beyond logic and
rationality and actually be
all of those things at once
right what if i could be here and not be
here at the same time
what if you are you know what what if
it's true
yeah you know that kind of thing um
if i said to you i'm not here or you're
not speaking to me
what would that in your mind what would
you say would you think if i said that
to you i would say
i'm not speaking to you right now i'm
not saying anything right i would say
that's true
i would say that you don't exist nor not
exist
right now but you the idea is that just
like godril showed right with the live
paradox it's like
this is even no it's not even like that
it's because in this case
if i say i'm not here that would be a
contradiction in terms right yeah
within the realm of logic yes of course
from an existential nature
it wouldn't be right i mean god god
created everything
right but but you could say that your
existence right now
maybe isn't as real as as god
right because it's a creation of god
it's some sort of abstraction from god
because you are not god right you're
saying that right
so in a sense you would be living in a
more
illusory world than god is right so in
the sense that this world would be some
sort of illusion
yet of course it's extremely real to you
so there's this
duality between reality and illusion
that can collapse
right and it's neither real nor not real
i think when you go deep enough you'll
find that everything about reality
it's either that nor not that
that's why i'm talking about reality is
this giant paradox it is this giant
contradiction we're just uncomfortable
with contradictions because we're in the
realm of logic
right so reality isn't even infinite nor
not infinite
right it's black nor white
right it's this singularity of of
grayscale right and i think that's the
issues that everyone is thinking in this
is black and white
this is how we've been raised to things
since we were we were kids
and it's it's so difficult to snap out
of the conceptual mind
but i think that it's possible to have
these two sides of the dualities
collapse into one
but this can't be done with the
conceptual mind because the conceptual
mind can only
think in dualities so it has to be a
deeper intuition
it's it's it's seeing the context not
the content it's it's kind of like
this reading in between the lines that
is completely ineffable
right it's like trying to talk talk to a
blind man about what color is
right of course a blind man could never
know it's telling someone who's
never eaten an apple what an apple
tastes like right
i think that's the idea but from my
experience reality doesn't have to be
one side of the duality or the other
it can be both and neither at the same
time it's just something impossible to
conceptualize but then again we know
that god is impossible to conceptualize
yeah i understand what you're saying but
the issue is that if we eliminate logic
from the conversation
then everything becomes impossible to
elaborate so if i say for example if i
if i say look i don't
i don't want to make a logical argument
because it's possible that
we can speak um we can speak
outside of the realms of logic in other
words we can make sense
we can we we can cohere if you like
right um
even even uh without
the rules of logic being but then if we
make that argument we'll be making a
logical argument
do you see the point so it's exactly
it's inescapable and it's so inescapable
that is
grammar and logic are two best friends
uh grammar and logic are in fact
um the two sides to the same coin
because
if you want to speak in any language not
just english but in any language
there is a systemized you know set of
conventions
that we're speaking with right and if we
really believe
that logic is not uh important or should
not
feature in a conversation or that we can
live without it or whatever
grammar would crumble civilization would
crumble
communication would crumble and almost
everything else would come up
and you you could not make an argument
for logic without using logic
and that would be that would be the
ultimate circularity
right exactly that's why everything i
say
is not truth that's that's why it's so
hard right because we're used to trying
to like have these
debates to determine things yeah and
that's not the best way to know right
the best way to know is simply
silence right ramana maharshi that's why
he taught that's why he taught
in silence he was silent all the time
unless someone really really
like begged him to to speak to him right
who's that sorry
uh ramana maharshi he is a i believe
he's a great indian sage right someone
who
has been known by that culture to have
known god directly so much so
i mean from from a very young age too um
really an incredible story if you look
up rama namahashi but he's
he's kind of this ancient guru but
the ultimate teacher is really silence
the ultimate teacher
goes beyond logic and rationality of
course
you can't just do that to someone who
has never
experienced any sort of knowing beyond
the conceptual mind
you have to kind of inch them in the
right direction with the right sort of
concepts right but
you'll find like as you go deep enough
into this logic and rationality
it just becomes circular it becomes this
giant
contradiction this giant paradox and you
either accept that
and push a little deeper or you just
have to admit that you can't know and
that's what most people do is they just
admit well
that's as far as logical logic and
rationality goes so i can't know
right yeah i once again this idea of the
fitra in islam is something which we
could even
supra rational so it's something that is
aside from the rational
in fact there's an entire kind of story
or narrative in islam
about how this came about which is uh
mentioned in the seventh chapter i
believe in the
uh 100 and maybe 70th verse i'm not sure
where it is exactly but
of the quran where it says that
god took basically all of the souls of
humankind
were in front of god and that he
had this interaction with them and he
said allah become
i am i not your lord so he had this kind
of question answer interaction
and then they said yes we bear test
testimony to that in other words
every single soul of every single human
being
has the um metaphorically speaking here
the signature of god in it
and this is the term of rene de ca the
signature of the autograph
he said the autograph of god in it every
single soul of the human being ever your
soul my soul everyone's soul
so that when such soul is put back into
the body
through the insolvent period say after
40 days of it being in the womb of the
mother we believe
that what happens is human being is born
in this state
of consciousness consciousness of god
and all they require
is reminder and that's why the quran is
actually referred to as
the reminder because it awakens
that reason that that that um that
or that disposition that we originally
had
the idea of islam is not necessarily
just to give demonstrable
proofs or cosmological argument or
finding tuning argument or
and those are good as well we can speak
about them as well but what we believe
is
one of the most self-evident ways of
proving god's existence
is the experience and so the quran when
it's coming now to remind humankind
it refers to itself as the or the
reminder
so it's it's trying to jog your memory
if you like yeah
have it in there that you believe in a
higher power and a creator and so on
the quran's job is to jog your memory
and to remind you
of your initial purpose your telios and
your tedious or your original purpose
is that you may worship
or submit to god and that is the way you
will be
some people say we want to be one with
nature you know this is
you'll find a lot in eastern tradition
that the idea of being uh
synchronized with with nature and this
is where
nirvana will be achieved or something
like this
the islamic conception is that the only
way to be one with nature
is to do what everything in nature is
doing which is submitting to the laws of
god
and one thing that god gave us we
believe
which is different from the rest of the
objects in nature
is he gave us free will
whereas an angel or let's say even
celestial objects and spheres they have
no choice but to submit to the laws
of god god distinguished human being
by giving them this intuition of free
will where we
we seem like we have this decision to
make
and then reminds that individual
with their purpose and calls them to
that purpose
such that if they if they come to that
purpose
if they come to that purpose they will
be higher than
everything else in creation even the
angels or even the
objects and space and so on because all
of those objects in space and
nature they haven't had to make a
decision
or they haven't used their free will or
volition
in order to come to a conclusion of god
and worshiping god
and so on whereas human being has and so
he is
elevated above and beyond the status
of all of those existences in the world
whether it's inanimate or
anima wherever it may be that have no
choice but to submit themselves
to the power and will of god we believe
so the
the the the the the crux here is if
one if one remembers
what their purposes and their calling is
in life and responds to that calling
then they become the believers that are
illuminated with the light of god
and if one decides to cover themselves
with
illusion and delusion and doubt then
they become those who are trying to
ignore the calling of god
i agree yeah 100 um
yeah i believe that most people are
caught
in this illusion and there's something
that's trying to get them to
remember i love it i've never heard of
that before what was that called you had
like a word for it
this remembering yeah so the the the
initial state is called the fitra
and it's an arabic word meaning
literally
the disposition the innate
predisposition
and then the the the quran refers to as
the or the the remembrance
so it's kind of like this is beautiful
in the quran by the way
and there's one verse in the quran which
is but one of the most powerful verses
the quran
which is in chapter 24 of the quran
and uh and the verse let me just read it
out for you because i
let me get it for you quickly i don't
want to i don't want to get this wrong
all right
it's in chapter 24
and verse 35 okay so let me
let me read it out for you i think you
you enjoy it because okay cool
cool this is one of like this is a
verse that many commentators have spent
their whole lives kind of
trying to study it says
allah is the light of the heavens and
the earth the parable of his light
is as if there were a niche and within
it a lamp
the lamp is in a glass the glass as it
were a brilliant star
lit from a blessed tree an olive neither
from
not neither of the east nor of the west
gets its sun rays only in the afternoon
but it's
exposed to the sun all day long whose
oil
would almost glow forth of itself though
no fire has touched it
light upon light allah guides to his
light to whom he wills
and allah sets forth parables for
mankind
and allah is then all noah of everything
the idea here
this niche a lot of scholars have said
this
you know it's like a niche it's like a
lamp inside it
is the human heart so we're talking
about the heart now
which is protected with the ribs and
it's
illuminating with light and that god is
also light
and that there is an interactivity
between the light that we all have
inside of us
and the light who is god and when god
sends
forth his his revelation it becomes
light upon light
so it's this combination this compounded
light
yeah and this is the experience we as
muslims we should be feeling i mean
you know and it's called there's
actually a phenomena referred to as
which is the sweetness of faith when you
are in
in this spiritual state where you're
really connecting with god
and you are really calling for god
yearning for him or prostrating to him
because prostration is one of the most
powerful positions from the muslim
perspective
this phenomenon of iman or the sweetness
of iman
it becomes expounded and it compounds
to the point where you literally can
almost you were talking about tasting
the apple
you can almost taste if you want to call
it the apple yourself you can taste it
it's literally sweet there's a sweetness
to it
and this can only be achieved through
real submission
pure submission knowing your place in
the universe
and knowing what the your place in
conjunction with the creator of the
universe
and so in that sense it's a first person
subjective experience but it's a very
very powerful
experience and one that in many ways
although it's not demonstrable in the
same way as maybe one of the arguments
the fine-tuning the kalam or the
contingency argument or
you know the arguments from prophethood
or whatever
this is a way where you can directly
have an interactivity with god where you
know
that there is a connection just like if
you call somebody now maybe
your friend or your partner or whoever
and you speak to them you know they're
on the other side although although
they're not
physically there when we're in the
prayer and we're prostrating and we're
bowing and all of these things or
repenting even
coming back to god after we've committed
sin whatever it may be
this is that kind of connection actually
the word salah comes from the arabic
word silla which means connection
so it's like we have a whatsapp
connection with god
through the prayer or you know telegram
whatsapp social media
but instead we have that connection with
god
i love it that's awesome i i think that
the world would be a much better place
when people focus on these direct
experiences
rather than these clashing beliefs you
know yeah i get your appointment
yeah i love it i love it that's awesome
so i do have an interesting question
though so yeah
you have this right there there's still
is a separation right between you
right and then god so this might be a
difficult question but
what are you you know what i mean like
how do you define
yourself right like what you are what is
your sense of self
so from the islamic perspective we are a
combination of things
a lot of people just say us duality or
dualism they say like
a lot of the islamic philosophers have
said this is mind-body journalism but
the truth is is
much more complex than that so we
believe that we are a body yes we
believe in the body
we believe in the mind now where is the
mind is it just
in the brain we don't believe it's just
in the brain for sure we believe that
there's a first person subjective
experience there
that there must be some kind of
connection between the the heart
the actual physical lump inside of your
chest
which by the way quite interestingly
recently they they've discovered in this
heart math institute they discovered
something called the little brain in the
heart or something like this in the 80s
they were writing peer reviewed journals
and stuff
talking about how the heart itself has
neurons and the capacity to kind of
oh absolutely yeah yeah yeah you might
have come across this yourself oh
yeah real quick it's really interesting
so they've done studies right when they
do like heart transplants
there's so many interesting stories
they'll do a heart transplant and the
person that got the new heart
will start behaving yes like the person
that they got the transplant from it's
incredible there's not just this massive
intelligence in our brain
but our ma this massive intelligence
especially in our heart but really just
just everywhere in our whole body
it's the mind and body are one and it's
it's very it's very beautiful
absolutely and and you know there is
something called heart blankness
in the uh islamic understanding
based on this understanding of the verse
where it says that you know it's not the
eyes that go blind it's the hearts
within the chest that go it's
so there is a if you want to even call
it cognition
but it's not just cognition it's a
presence it's a conscientiousness
of the heart so it's an interactivity of
the brain yes but the brain
and the heart and the soul and all of it
comes together in a perfect harmony
in a per it's like a it's like a show
almost like you know
it's all coming together and it's
interacting it's not just a dualism of
mind body no this much more complex than
that
and when you're in the state of
meditation okay when you say of we
believe
oneness with god and where you calling
god and and you're asking him for
guidance and so on
all of these things kind of come
together they
congregate they congregate in
in submission to the the ultimate light
which is
we believe god is nourish literally as
the verse says that
he is the light of the heavens and the
earth and his light
is is metaphoric but in this verse but
it's also something which is
uh many ways literal as well something
which is
powerful and which goes straight to the
heart
i love it wow that's beautiful yeah
that's that's that's awesome
i love it you know that's it's such a it
seems like such a deeper experience than
most people are used to you know at
least most people in
in my culture right the the culture of
the trinity you know it's all in their
mind that's it they can't get out of
their mind that's that's
that's everything right i mean geez the
hustle and bustle of society the stress
the anxiety everyone's caught in their
mind right and they couldn't even fathom
some sort of experience like that
where this this intelligence lines up
in the whole body not just the mind
right that's such an interesting
experience that most people could not
even fathom
is some sort of cognition that's beyond
the brain
right that's in the scientific community
it's like that's it the brain houses
everything yes it houses everything
here's here's the interesting analogy
that i like to make
right because there has to be some sort
of intelligence beyond
the body some intelligence that actually
gives rise to the body think about a
dream
right when you're in a dream your mind
is creating the entire dream right
everyone will admit that your mind's
creating the dream you don't know how
it's creating the dream
right but your subconscious mind is
creating the entire dream and you
understand this when you you become
lucid in the dream
now science the scientific community the
second the third time you mentioned
lucid dreams i mean it's
something that you're into yeah
absolutely man lucid dreams are great i
mean i
i think lucid dreaming is a great way to
kind of get in touch with reality as
well
and kind of realize the similarities
between like dreaming and reality
right that it's not just some physical
process you know
and so when when you become lucid in the
dream
you realize that the whole mind is
creating the dream and scientists will
say oh well all of that is just
happening within the brain
but not the dream
brain does that make sense so if you're
sitting in a dream and you reach inside
and feel your brain
that brain that you're feeling in the
dream is not creating the entire dream
right so with that same analogy and of
course you could you could argue that
dreams are different from reality blah
blah blah
but it's interesting to think about well
what if this brain
right is not creating this reality
right god is creating this reality and
the brain is just an experience
of reality it's an appearance in reality
and of course it has its place
right because the earth is and the
universe is physical but also not
physical right there's this interesting
yeah so you're kind of alluding to
solipsism i'm not sure if you've
come across idea of the brain and that
i guess i wouldn't say i'm alluding to
that per se right now of course
you can't really argue against it yeah
it's impossible
right there it's nothing you could never
experience anything beyond soliciting i
like thinking of solacism
not as a truth or untruth but as a
description of your reality
right and you'll find that i think the
deeper you go you realize that
it can't be really solipsism nor not
solipsism
right it's solid system under one case
because your direct experience is all
that you'll ever have
right and of course that's what it is
but yet there's this incredible
complexity of other minds and those
minds are
you can experience those minds being
just as real as you even if they're in
your mind
they're still a different mind right
like that other mind still exists
even if it's part of your mind and then
you'll start getting into wow
it's kind of all one mind right it's the
mind of
of god right and there's this i mean
here's what we would say
like in terms of there's actually
we've got a theology of this and in
terms of sleeping i think and dreaming
is really powerful it's a really
powerful way
i mean freud himself has written a book
on on dreams but
he he obviously attributes it to the he
has this thing of the illegal and super
ego and he attributes it to the
unconscious mind and that's why it's
part of his hypnosis and free
association and so on
but in the islamic understanding
although that does have something to
play i mean the unconscious mind
is one of the reasons why we have dreams
and in fact there's a hadith that goes
to that effect
there's something else which is the fact
that when human beings
lose consciousness and they fall asleep
from the islamic perspective
they literally the soul leaves their
body at that point
leaves their body they're detached from
their body so the state of
unconsciousness
is a state which is categorized or
characterized sorry from the islamic
perspective as
uh the leaving of the soul from the body
and so that is why the prophet said that
basically sleep is the brother of death
because when you're sleeping and when
you're dying
the same process is effectively taking
place but in in two different ways
when you're sleeping the process is that
your soul
comes out of your body and then it comes
back in
effectively when you regain
consciousness even if you sleep moment
for a very
short period of time when you're when
you're dying the same exact thing
happens
but the only thing is that your body
decays for a long time because it
your soul is suspended from the body and
then from the islamic perspective once
again it is reunited with the body
but in the day of judgment so there's a
there's a longer transition period
the same state is the state is the same
so even
from a scientific perspective you say
this we can say or
especially with consideration to the
first person subjective experiences that
we have
when we do sleep we lose consciousness
when we lose consciousness we have
experienced dreams
when we experience dreams how real are
these dreams
i mean i've experienced this kind of
hallucination dreams which i feel like
i'm in a
a place i don't know i don't know if
you've taken this a lot of people talk
about psychedelics nowadays i'm not sure
if you've er
have you tried that of course i've done
my fair share i've never i've never done
it
i may not ask you about that because you
know to be honest when i just the other
day just like three or four days ago
i've never had any recreational drugs in
my life yeah honestly
wow yeah yeah no i've never had drinking
or any intoxication
anything like because it's not allowed
in the religion that's why i've never
i've never done it
um in my 29 years but the other day
honestly like
two weeks ago i had this i was sleeping
but honestly it felt like i was what i
thought was happening like
the stars were falling on me the stars
were falling on me like it was i felt
like it was real i honestly felt
and then i woke up and i was like whoa
man was that real or not like i didn't
even know the difference
where am i what reality am i in right it
was
i don't know if psychedelics make you
feel like that because joe rogan keeps
talking about his podcast
you can't even put it into a category
like that right depending on how much
you do and which kinds
and even what spiritual state that
you're in it can be
it's indescribable right it's you can
have experiences that are beyond the
conceptual mind that are impossible to
yes yes is it kind of like what i'm
describing
oh absolutely i mean oh for sure right
for sure but
of course it can go even deeper than
that right it can get absolutely insane
right and
so what's your number one experience
sorry just to
after it gets crazy man it gets so crazy
i mean you know one of my first
ever experiences one of my big
breakthrough experiences on psychedelics
was
it was this substance known as ayahuasca
have you heard of ayahuasca no
okay ayahuasca the the substance is
called dmt dimethyltryptamine have you
heard of that yeah yeah yeah i've heard
of the
so it's it's the oral version of
dimethyltryptamine you have to take it
with a monoamine
um oxidase i believe i believe monoamine
oxidase inhibitor
right all of these are hallucinogens
yeah hulu
yeah for sure yeah now i have an
interesting concept about
hallucinations right because from a
first person perspective essentially
right everything is just like
hallucination right yeah good point yeah
but yeah but so the craziest experience
i really had
was some sort of
weird it you can't really call it
reincarnation because it was
i came back in the same body right but
essentially an absolute complete
utter ego death right where i became
absolute nothingness
okay so no thoughts no recollection of
who i was
just infinite presence and then
i was all of a sudden this was in
nowhere right and then all of a sudden i
come back
and i'm in my body but i'm in my body
experiencing the world as if i were a
baby
right so i actually had the experience
of being a baby and
looking at the world i was looking up
the stars and at this beautiful scenery
in the desert
but i had no recollection of what
anything is
that how real did that feel how real did
that feel for you oh no this is a thing
so
it's realer than than real right this is
why
it's people who have had these
experiences can't call them
hallucinations because
it makes this feel like a hallucination
it's essentially from it's like you're
in
2d okay imagine your whole life is in 2d
and then all of a sudden you experience
3d
well how can you say that the 3d is a
hallucination no no it's like whoa oh no
no the
the 2d is just a finite abstraction of
this 3d
right that's your point so it feels more
real than what you're going through now
oh yeah absolutely and it was incredible
it felt like all of a sudden i was this
just blank slate of a of a purely blank
mind and then all my memories started
flowing in
for me i wouldn't know i could have been
born on that day
and i wouldn't have known right that day
i could have just had all my memories
and ideas of the past and my sense of
self
come to me right then like and i
wouldn't know the difference right
and that could have been the day that
like the universe was created you know
like i wouldn't know any difference
and so that was really the most profound
experience
i would say and then i've had you know
many many many
since then that are so that is like the
deepest that i can explain with words
okay so that's the one that i can you
can conceptualize that kind of
but there are other ones that are just
so beyond concept that it wouldn't even
make sense to talk about right but um
yeah like yeah man i mean of course
like so like so from the islam paradigm
there's a way of explaining all of this
so the soul is what's going through all
these experiences
right so obviously on a materialist or
naturalistic
um approach a physicalist approach they
say it's all the brain and they'll give
you mri scans of how your brain
kind of interacts and when it's on dmt
for example how it
how it kind of activates compared to
when it's not on dmt for instance and i
say look
everything is fired up and it looks like
everything is fired up and they'll
explain it like that
but for us that's a very insignificant
kind of it's a
it's not a good explanation but for us
we believe that there's a soul in the
human being
and the way to explain these experiences
whether you're sleeping
or whether you're having one of your dmt
uh experiences
or psychedelic drugs all of it is the
same thing the soul
is literally it comes out of the body
and it goes through it goes to a place
which we refer to as barzah
which is exactly the same place where it
goes when it when it dies basically when
you die
you will not just cease being right the
soul
will be go to another place and it will
experience
a reality just like you've just said
that you've experienced reality that in
your words was more real than
what we're going through now in in many
ways it was this reality that you're
going to go through it's an objective
reality
which will be as real as what we're
talking right now
and it will be one where literally
you're confronted with your actions
whether you have been a good person
you'll be confronted with that and the
angels will come once again
interrogating you what what did you
believe in and this and that and what
you good person or a bad person
and there will be an entire kind of uh
thing that will take place before we
what we refer to as a day of judgment
takes place
so i think when this whole thing of
psychedelics is opened up to people the
possibilities
of of the soul being a reality because
they're not convinced a lot of people
becoming less and less convinced with
these physicalist
interpretations it's all the brain
because they know that this is something
which is deeper than that
absolutely yeah i think it's i think it
goes even deeper than that i don't think
it's one way or the other i think this
is the brilliance of reality
is that it's really impossible to
understand with a conceptual mind but
it's this
it has you know what a strange loop is
essentially is sort of this
hierarchical structure where you know
there's this it could be an
object that's both like like inside and
outside at the same time or it's kind of
like a hierarchical structure where a is
greater than b is greater than c is
greater than a
and so like the penrose triangle is an
idea of a strange loop and
that can't really exist in like the 3d
world
but that doesn't mean that it doesn't
exist and essentially
reality you'll find that reality is this
type of strange loop where
not only is the universe in the brain
but the brain is also in the universe
right it's not really like one or the
other it's this incredible
singularity of presence and oneness
that's that's really really interesting
but
the the thing is is that it helps for
people to
see the entire coin they first need to
see the other side of the coin and then
they can see the whole coin so most
people will just see this as this
physical universe
so it helps them to talk about the
perspective
of this being some sort of mental
creation
and then the next level is just it kind
of comes all together and you realize
it's really both
and that's the beauty behind it right
it's actually this perfect
design that is so powerful and so
infinite
that it's just impossible to really
comprehend with the the normal human
mind
well it's very powerful what you've said
and i think you've opened up a lot of
our horizons and given us a lot of
insights um
and look it's been a pleasure having you
on this podcast at any time you want to
come and ask us any questions you can
and i'm going to be sending you a couple
of
things over to you if you just send me
your email or something like that i'll
send you some
some materials some of the books that
we've written some of the materials are
like the quran you can read um a
translation that one of my friends has
just completed mustafa
and other things that hopefully will be
of use to you but have you got any like
questions before we go or anything that
you are wondering
no i think that's pretty much it man i
really enjoyed the conversation
it was a very it was just an awesome
conversation you know you know i love
i love talking about this it's
refreshing to see people that now like i
think a lot of people now are moving
away from that like the whole
new atheist materialist kind of it's not
satisfying people and
no absolutely not yeah i think that
you're you're definitely on the right
tracks man it's
it's it's refreshing to have these kinds
of conversations with people that go
beyond the okay like standard evidences
new
new atheist jargon and stuff like that
man exactly you realize that stuff is
limited man so
yeah i love it hopefully you know my i
think your followers
are going to be much more open to this
than mine mine are still i changed my
content recently so it's tough trying to
explain these concepts to
such egoic materialist i used to be a
fitness dude who just like worked out
and was all about like the body and
stuff like that and that's who my fans
are so
it'll be awesome to have someone who has
this like authority that you do
in the more like spiritual realm right
believe me i don't have any authority at
all
[Laughter]
my followers don't don't give me any
authority like that man really oh they
should man they should
yeah you're a great intellectual man you
you talk about this stuff in a really
articulate way that i really appreciate
yeah well thank you very much man i
think that definitely when you have
uh a dance partner like you it's always
gonna be easier isn't it
and it's good that like you know
obviously um you gave us like this whole
psychedelic thing i've always actually
wanted to ask someone
about it because i've never had the
opportunity to do that before man oh
yeah man of course i i definitely
recommend it
it's just you need to combine it with
spirituality people will do psychedelics
and just do it to do it it's not like
that right it's essentially the same
thing as
taking some sort of anabolic steroid
when uh without working out at all
have you done this before as well uh i
actually haven't that's the thing i
actually like
yourself yeah no one no one believes me
about that but um
i actually haven't you know i used to be
a lot bigger i used to be very obsessive
about working out but now i've kind of i
found a balance
yeah mm-hmm yeah man all right well it's
been a pleasure
yeah of course man anytime you know our
house is your house man as they say
awesome sounds good all right man
hopefully we're gonna put this up and
uh you can take any part of it you want
and put it on your channel as well man
cool so that's probably the best idea is
just to take one segment maybe a few
minutes yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah and just promote your
podcast
yeah fantastic thanks so much man yeah
of course um where can i find your
podcast to get like put something it'll
be on my channel
on my youtube channel okay perfect yeah
awesome so this video will be on your
channel yeah yeah for sure
awesome hell yeah sweet i appreciate it
man thank you so much for having me
appreciate you man see you later man
take care